---
layout: post
title: "Here's a title."
subtitle: "Here's a subtitle, AKA a brief & catchy sentence or two that go below the title."
author: sarah
category: [examplecategory]
tags: [tag1, tag2, tag3]
permalink: "/testing"
date: 12 December 2020
image_path: 'media/sitewide/logo.svg'
image_alt: 'Alt text for the image goes here.'
image_caption: 'Photograph: [author] / [source].'
---

# This is a test heading.

In the year 2020, a year marked by an unprecedented global health crisis, an all-time high in the number of people displaced by conflict, violence and disasters, the worst wildfire season in history, record hemispheric heat spelling an impending climate catastrophe, never-before-seen political and economic divisions, and countless upheavals against systemic racism, inequality, corruption, and oppression, we, women who write, read, interpret, and critique code, say, Enough with Big Tech!   

Enough with its hijacking our freedom while parading as a savior amidst a global pandemic.

Enough with its incessant datafication of human life.

Enough with its shameless exploitation of our personal data.

Enough with its algorithms ceaselessly trying to determine our every decision – from where we buy groceries to who should be marked for “preventative” police surveillance.

Enough with its clandestine dealings with oppressive governments, jeopardizing the lives of dissenters and peaceful communities.

Enough with its covert military-style psychological operations seeking to understand and control the most intimate aspects of our humanity – our thoughts and emotions.

Enough with its “young boys’ club” mentality de facto discriminating against women, people of color and other minority groups both in the workplace and in the algorithms it unleashes onto society.

We recognize the recent efforts of government programs, university educators, community organizations, and even tech companies themselves to diversify STEM curricula and create spaces more inviting for women, people of color, members of the LGBTQ community and other marginalized groups, but we believe this is not enough. Much more is needed to ensure the information economy can meet the extraordinary challenges facing our society today in a just, equitable, and sustainable way.

As a first step in this direction, the role of women, and especially women of color, in uncovering the gross violations of ethics (and sometimes the law) perpetrated by Big Tech ought to be acknowledged and firmly and decisively incorporated into the ethos, practice and training of coders and data scientists everywhere. From Barbara Smith’s Combahee River Collective and Donna Haraway’s “informatics of domination,” through Shoshana Zuboff’s “instrumentarian power” and Zeynep Tufekci’s “marketplace of ideas,” to micha cárdenas’ “android goddess,” Virginia Eubanks’ “digital poorhouse,” Cathy O’Neil’s “weapons of math destruction,” and Simone Browne’s “dark matters,” women in the last few decades have worked tirelessly to give us the vocabulary and critical tools to identify, describe, denounce, and resist what Ewa Plonowska Ziarek calls “the new forms of oppression” advances in technology, and Big Tech in particular, ostensibly unwittingly create. Women in academia have also spearheaded labs and thinktanks such as the AI Now Institute to critically examine the social implications of big science. Such liberatory projects have been undertaken by non-academic activists and grassroot organizations as well. Social movements such as #SayHerName and #BlackLivesMatter – both spearheaded by Black women who had had enough – effectively changed the racial justice discourse in the U.S. and around the world, and helped galvanize the racial reckoning following the murder of George Floyd. And let’s not forget the courageous women-whistleblowers! Just this past week, former Facebook data scientist Sophie Zhang posted a detailed memo replete with examples of how political leaders in Azerbaijan, Bolivia, Honduras and Ukraine use fake Facebook accounts to artificially boost social media engagement and sway public opinion, sparking oftentimes deadly protests and wholesale regime changes.   

Only by striking down the rigid vertical structures of patriarchy’s hegemony over science and knowledge, and replacing them with the intersubjective relational model of data justice these exceptional women have helped create inspired by their own analyses and the ideas of women, people of color, and enlightened men before them, can we hope to avoid the disruption Big Tech is about to cause; disruption commensurate with the devastation predicted by global warming activists.
    
 
 
