---
layout: post
title: "Do you have to hate women to worship the rap god?"
subtitle: "This project strips away the distractions — the sardonic wordplay, the sharp beats, the power of voice and cadence — and re-contextualizes Eminem's lyrics as a time capsule of popular misogyny and toxic masculinity."
author: "sarah"
category: [fck-it]
permalink: "projects/fck-it/rapgod"
image_path: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1493225457124-a3eb161ffa5f?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1350&q=80"
image_alt: "Stock close-up image of a singer at a concert, holding a microphone, with blurred sparks and smoke in the background."
---

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/d3/6.5.0/d3.min.js" integrity="sha512-0XfwGD1nxplHpehcSVI7lY+m/5L37PNHDt+DOc7aLFckwPXjnjeA1oeNbru7YeI4VLs9i+ADnnHEhP69C9CqTA==" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>

<link
	rel="stylesheet"
	href="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/css/projects/rapgod.css"
/>

# **CONTENT WARNING**

The content on this page contains implicit and explicit references to misogyny and homophobia. You can click the button below to reveal a list of specific content warnings. You can click [here](https://freethedataproject.com/) to return to our landing page or [here](https://freethedataproject.com/projects/) to return to our projects page.

{% include_relative /rapgod/accordion.html %}

# Introduction

Eminem’s music, and his career more generally, sits uncomfortably between two poles. He’s been a consistent advocate for racial equality; he’s denounced former presidents Trump and Bush, as well as their supporters; he's created music with feminist advocates such as Beyonce; and he’s periodically apologized for some of his past sexism and homophobia. But at the same time, across the vast majority of his career, Eminem has unabashedly and relentlessly rapped about abusing, harassing, assaulting, raping, murdering, stalking, and demeaning women. 

I started this project because I wondered: Are there _any_ Eminem songs that a woman can listen to without exposing herself to misogyny? Must a bitchcuntslutwhore bracket her values and self-respect to worship the rap god? 


{% include_relative /rapgod/viz1.html %}


The problem with a chart like this is that we don't need to see it to know that Eminem's music is misogynistic. While there was no doubt a time when Eminem's lyrics were a controversial subject of mainstream debate, it seems that over the past couple of decades, public concern over his lyrical content has fizzled out. These days, the problem isn't so much that critiquing Eminem's misogyny is too easy; it's that it's too banal. So banal that I (and perhaps you) can look at a chart like the one above and think, "Well, duh."

But to stop here — with the declaration that about 87% of Eminem's songs are misogynistic, followed by a shrug – would be to miss the kinds of patterns that surface in his lyrics. It's not just that Eminem is a misogynist; it's that his misogyny is deliberate and self-aware. It's evolved between albums and over time, both in its degree of violence and in its cultural references. While Eminem is considered to be one of the most-streamed musicians in history CITE, it can be hard to visualize the forest of his misogyny through the proverbial trees of his songs. **This project therefore strips away the distractions — the sardonic wordplay, the sharp beats, the power of voice and cadence — and uses data visualizations to re-contextualize Eminem's lyrics as a time capsule of popular misogyny[^2] and white masculinity.[^3]**

This project is **not** a denouncement of rap, a tactic to shame Eminem fans, a call for censorship, or an argument that Eminem is somehow causing people to hate women. Misogyny is endemic to all music genres, I’m an Eminem fan myself, I value freedom of expression, and it would be wildly off the mark to make Eminem misogyny’s scapegoat.
			
This project **is** a critique of misogyny’s commonplace in the media that we enjoy, and it forwards this critique by taking a popular musician as a case study. It questions what it means to enjoy music that demeans women at a time where we’re becoming more culturally sensitive to the fact that violent words can _do_ things, even when they’re said in jest or in a rhyme. I’m not sure if visibility is the answer—it could be that reproducing Eminem’s misogyny below does nothing more than, y’know, reproduce misogyny. But people are hearing these words anyway, so my hope is that we might gain something from re-contextualizing them. A complete, interactive dataset of the lyrics that I coded for this project is available [here](). You'll find additional commentary, notes on methods, and citations [at the end of the page](). For now, I'll turn the mic over to Eminem:



MAYBE: FOCUS ON NOTEWORTHY TRENDS, BUT OTHERWISE PROVIDE A DASHBOARD
# Slurs

{% include_relative /rapgod/viz2.html %}


# Violence

correlations -- 

{% include_relative /rapgod/corr.html %}

# Stereotypes 

asdf

# Trivialization

sdf 

# Women guests

[^1]: This is the first footnote.
[^2]: This is the second footnote.
[^3]: This is the second footnote.



# Conclusion

Eminem's music, and his career more generally, sits uncomfortably between two poles. He’s been a consistent advocate for racial equality; he’s denounced former presidents Trump and Bush, as well as their supporters; and he's periodically apologized for some of his past sexism and homophobia. But he hasn't stopped it. Across the vast majority of his career, Eminem has unabashedly rapped about abusing, harassing, assaulting, raping, murdering, stalking, and demeaning women. 

A friend — Leni, actually — shared this article with me the other day, which is what prompted me to finish assembling the visualizations I'd started back in November. As it turns out, I'm not the only person to be exploring this line of thinking: Will Eminem be canceled? _Should_ Eminem be canceled? _Can_ Eminem be canceled? To be clear, I don't actually think Eminem should be canceled. I also don't think he <i>can</i> be canceled, at least not for his lyrics alone. (Not to mention the fact that he's already issued a pre-emptive response to any efforts to do so.) 



After doing my initial collection of misogynistic lyrics, I returned to my data — X rows, each one representing a line of misogyny — and performed more detailed inductive coding. Here, I tried to label the kind(s) of misogyny I was seeing, and I consulted sources such as GeniusLyrics in cases where I wasn't sure if I was interpreting a given cultural reference accurately. Once I made it through the first round of coding, I developed an informal set of codes, which I applied to the complete set of lyrics. After this second round of review, I made a few adjustments to the codebook. Using this now-official codebook, I went through the lyrics a third and final time to ensure that I had used the final set of labels consistently. At this point, I also went through and manually coded occurrences of slurs.  



# Notes on methods

Though I use numeric data visualizations in the remainder of this page, this project is an unabashedly critical and qualitative—rather than quantitative—undertaking. The end of the page includes a more detailed review of the methods that I used to determine whether a lyric qualified as misogynistic. But I want to emphasize here that my definitions, while developed from peer-reviewed academic literature, have not themselves been peer-reviewed. Additionally, I was the only person to apply the set of labels I developed to Eminem's songs. In other words, if another individual were to undertake this project—developing their own codes, applying them, and analyzing the results—they may end up with a completely different picture of Eminem's music. 