---
layout: post
title: "Data Justice 101"
permalink: /projects/data-101/data-justice-101/
tags: data-justice article
image_path: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1507008597831-58f0590c635d?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1350&q=80)"
image_alt: "Photograph of a mural. The mural has red and green shapes arranged to look kind of like flowers. One set of shapes has a message symbol in the center, while the other has an arrow."
author: frida
umbrella: "datajustice"
category: [data_101]
subtitle: "Data justice involves a commitment to researching and analyzing data in ways that are equitable, morally righteous, and ethical; understanding how marginalized groups are helped or harmed by data-driven practices; and identifying and resolving structural inequities that surface in data-driven research."
---

[some kind of intro paragraph here]

# What is data justice?

Data: A collection of information and/or facts, typically used for research and analysis.  
Justice: The principle that all individuals deserve to be treated, and should behave, in ways that are equitable, morally righteous, and ethical. 

Data Justice involves a commitment to researching and analyzing data in ways that are equitable, morally righteous, and ethical; understanding how marginalized groups are helped or harmed by data-driven practices; identifying and resolving structural inequities that surface in data-driven research

Broadly, the concept of data justice has emerged in response to two interrelated problems that occur in data-driven research. 

First: The belief that data — and data-driven research — are unbiased, neutral, and/or objective. [brief description/explanation]

Second: Ongoing structural inequalities in data-driven research that systematically harm marginalized groups. [brief description/explanation] [maybe a transition sentence??]

# Why does data justice matter? 

We can understand why data justice matters by looking at what happens in its absence. Below are a few examples of inequities in data-driven research that scholars and activists have identified. Click on any card to open a modal with a description of the example. 

Example1
Example2
Example3 
Example4 

Data justice advocates draw attention to problems like these, study the outcomes of such inequities, strategize to develop solutions, and demand accountability and transparency from institutions that rely on data-driven practices. In short, data justice matters because people matter. It matters that we use data to reduce, rather than reproduce, inequity, oppression, and marginalization. 

## What are the most pressing concerns for data justice advocates?
WHAT ARE THE MOST PRESSING CONCERNS FOR DATA JUSTICE ADVOCATES? 

Any data-driven practice that contributes to inequity, oppression, and marginalization is a pressing concern. That said, many of the concerns that data justice advocates have raised target the following areas: 

Artificial intelligence
Policies 
Content regulation
Micro-targeting
???

## What are the outcomes of data-driven inequalities? 

Inequitable data practices have rippling consequences across many aspects of our lives, including, among many others:

Policing
Healthcare & medicine
Advertising (?)
Employment
Financial services
The Economy™ (? like-- credit scores; stock market; housing security; idfk) 
Education
Environment
Safety
Media & social media
Housing 

Unethical data practices have historically – and disproportionately – inflicted harm on already-marginalized populations. Given the intersectional nature of our identities, each of us will vary in the extent to which we feel the impacts of data-driven inequities in our day-to-day lives.   And studying data-driven inequalities is made all the more challenging when data is 

WHO PRACTICES DATA JUSTICE? 

Activists, scientists, academics, and journalists are just a few examples of data justice practitioners. Below, we highlight several influential data justice advocates and organizations. Each of these individuals and groups has informed our understanding of data justice and our commitment to its principles. This list is far from exhaustive; for even more examples of badass data justice advocates, you can jump to the end of the page for a complete list. [the site page will hyperlink to the section.]

PEOPLE

Safiya Noble
Joy Buolamwini
Catherine D'Ignazio & Lauren F. Klein
Meredith Broussard 
Cathy O’Neil 
Caroline Criado-Perez
dana boyd (?)

ORGANIZATIONS

Data Justice Lab
MIT Media Lab
Data + Justice Project [Beeker]
Data + Feminism Lab [MIT]
Engagement Lab [emerson]
Data & Society

HOW CAN I PRACTICE DATA JUSTICE?

Committing to data justice means asking things like:
 
Who is conducting data-driven research? 
What questions are (not) being asked/researched?
What data is being collected? How is it collected? With whom is(n’t) it shared?
In whose interest is this research being done? Who benefits? Who is harmed?


[FINISH THIS SECTION - PRACTICAL/PRAGMATIC ACTIONS PPL CAN TAKE]




FULL LIST OF RESOURCES TO LEARN MORE ABOUT DATA JUSTICE:

